\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c gk.texi -- Local documentation for my emacs configuration

@c %**start of header
@setfilename gk.info
@settitle Göktuğ's Emacs Configuration
@c %**end of header
@copying
Documentation for my Emacs user configuration.

@quotation
I use emacs, which might be thought of as a thermonuclear word processor.

@author Neal Stephenson
@end quotation

@quotation
Almost all of the really smart people I know use Emacs.

@author Paul Johnson
@end quotation

@quotation
People sometimes ask me if it is a sin in the Church of Emacs to use
vi.  Using a free version of vi is not a sin; it is a penance.  So
happy hacking.

@author Richard Stallman
@end quotation

Copyright @copyright{} 2017  Göktuğ Kayaalp

The document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title Göktuğ's Emacs Configuration
@subtitle Documentation for my Emacs user configuration
@author Göktuğ Kayaalp @email{<self|@|gkayaalp.com>}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Göktuğ's Emacs Configuration

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Introduction::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction, Index, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

Göktuğ's Emacs configuration is a combination of an Elisp package (gk
in the directory @file{gk/}), a bunch of external modules (in the
@file{site/} directory) and packages (in the @file{packages/}
directory), some modules loosely-coupled with my config (in the
@file{lisp/} directory), some non-elisp configuration files (in the
@file{etc/} directory), some auxiliary files (in the @file{extras/}
directory), some themes (in the @file{themes/} directory), some
patches for GNU Emacs and related packages (in the @file{patches/}
directory), and local documentation (in the @file{docs/} directory).

Partial paths refer to files under a checkout of this configuration if
not denoted otherwise.  For files outside a checkout of this
configuration, absolute paths are used.

Throughout this document, expressions like @dfn{my config}, @dfn{my
configuration}, @dfn{this config} and @dfn{this configuration} refer
to @dfn{Göktuğ's configuration}, as documented by this documentation.

@node Index,  , Introduction, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c compile-command: "makeinfo --fill-column=70 gk.texi"
@c End:

@c gk.texi ends here
